---
title: Afuera
date: 2024-01-23
description: Staying focused, building faster
tags:
  - startups
  - product
  - engineering
---

So, um, this is a recording for an article that I'm gonna write. The title of the article shall be, um, Afuera Product Development or just Afuera, which is like a Spanish word if I'm not mistaken. It's called Afuera. So, um, how this term was coined. I think that, uh, if you Google right now the term Afuera Development or Afuera Product Engineering or Afuera Product Management, you will not really find, um, this phrase. So I think I will be the first one to actually use this. And I think I'm coining this term. So, for a little bit of context and a little bit of history, this is how I came up with this term, this phrase. I was scrolling Twitter or X as it's called these days. And there are a few founders, like startup founders, I really admire. And they come from different backgrounds. Some of them are actually engineers. Some of them are product guys. But they all take, they all have some sort of thesis behind how they do startups. And they can be admired in certain ways. They have a framework of how they develop startups. They have a certain playbook. I'm not sure if they have it written or if they have it in their mind. But in general they tend to follow certain patterns when they build a new product or when they create a new team. Or when they're designing a company or the style they operate, etc. So, the thing is that I was, as I was saying, I was casually browsing Twitter and Nikita Beer comes up. So, Nikita Beer is this guy, I think he grew up in Ukraine. He's now living in San Francisco, maybe. He's in the US, I'll figure this out. He was the founder of an app called 2BH. Like, to be honest, I suppose. Or something like that, that was acquired by Facebook. And I think his most recent company or app was Gas. It was an app for high schoolers, basically. And that one was acquired from Discord. And it went from product launch to acquisition within a few months. I'm not sure how many months Nikita has been envisioning this app. How long he has been preparing for that launch and how long the design phase has been. But I feel like it was pretty short and it was brief. And it was executed pretty fast. So, because I'm following this guy, I sometimes get notifications about tweets he makes. Or I can see replies that he did on other posts, like on other tweets on X. And as I'm scrolling through, a couple of weeks ago, there was this video from Millet. I don't remember if that's his surname or if that's his first name. But the guy is called Millet and he's current president of Argentina. Small parenthesis here. Millet is the current president of Argentina. He's this very neo-capitalist guy. He claims he's an anarcho-capitalist. He has opinions that are extremely... They sit on extremely capitalistic foundations. He believes that the state should be essentially minimized. He believes that corporations should be free to do whatever they want. I'm not 100% sure about his political agenda or his manifesto. But he made a recent speech in Davos and that was a pretty interesting one. So I'll probably add some quotes from there and some links below. Why am I mentioning Millet? So there's this video from... I think it was even before he was elected. It might have been a couple of weeks before his election. And there's Millet and there's a board. And that board contains post-it notes or post-it notes with magnets or something like that. With the names of the ministries of the Argentinian government. And he's just like... I think he's Argentinian and he speaks Spanish. And he goes by the board and there's the Ministry of Human Rights and the Ministry of Environment Protection. You know, all these ministries that haven't been around that long. And they're practically ministries that emerged recently to battle some social problems that have been arising as of lately. And he just plucks one out of the board and he yells like, Which, if I'm not mistaken, in Spanish it means out. Like, I'm throwing this out. Or get out, probably. And he goes like, and just plucks out five or six ministries. And below that comment, below that video, there's a reply, a humoristic reply from Guido Beer. Who's a very talented social media user and ex-user. And he goes like, this is what I do when we do scrums or when we do product management meetings. I get to the board and there are features of the platform. And I just go, afuera, afuera. Just removing everything. And at that point I found this really funny. So, everything starts from things being funny. I believe that that's when something is really nailed on your mind on the very first time. You can read a thousand-page book and it might be excellent. It might be a really good essay that's writing this book. And the very fact is that moments that will stick to your brain without too much effort are basically the funny ones. Or the ones that you're actually interested because you were looking for them. So, this is a funny post and it sticks to my mind. I'm not immediately processing that. This is a really good concept of actually building software. Especially if you're a one-man team and you're an engineer. Or you're an indie hacker and you want to do a product. And you don't have the cash to do it in weeks and weeks of design sessions and building sessions. Because I think indie hackers also have limited amounts of attention span on a very specific product. Unless they get to launch it and they get to start getting feedback so they can iterate. Because they have to basically do the entire thing. They have to do every little component, every little system that this product will actually use to be out there for users. Because engineers, because builders need to do that. As I was saying, it's like a Fuera development method. Like a Fuera product management. I think it's really valuable. And I started thinking about it and I tried experimenting with it. And I tried basically implementing it on one of the projects that I was doing. So, I wasn't 100% comfortable that this was going to work for existing products that I had. Like under the development pipeline, under the building pipeline. But I had an idea for a really small application that I'm building. It's called Mermed. I'm not pronouncing it wrong. But it's actually called Mermed. It's M-E-R-M-D. And it's coming from Mermaid. For the Mermaid charts. It's basically just an app. It's an iPhone app. It's an Android app. That will give you the ability to create Mermaid charts from your phone. Validate them, export them, etc. It's a really useful app for me at least. I'm going to leave a link to that here. And I thought, hey, I have very limited time to do this. This is an app that probably is useful to like 0.0001% of the population. I have mostly like a couple of million engineers out there. A couple of hundred thousands of them are actually interested in Mermaid charts. And tens of thousands or even less than tens of thousands are actually interested in being able to build Mermaid charts on their phones. So yeah, it's kind of a very specific app. It's a very small population target for this app. So I won't invest too much time into it. But I want to make it so that it's really useful to me. I want to make it as simple as possible. I want to make it really easy to use. Because there's like an existing app out there that's called Mermaid Editor. And I paid for it. And it was pretty expensive. And it was crap. Sorry, whoever built this app. But it's really crap. I hope your 4 euros I paid for it are virtual coffee or something. But it's really crap. It's not usable. I want to build this and I want to have it on my phone. And I'm not a mobile developer, right? This is practically the first mobile app that I'm ever building. And I'm using React Native, which I've never used before. And I want to do things right. I want to make it performant. I want to make it simple to use. I don't want to have any fancy features. And I'm like... Yeah, this is probably like... It's not a high-priority project. It's not a project that I'm expecting to make money from. It's a hub project mostly. Although I will be using it for work. But it's mostly about crafting up charts for social media posts, etc. So, yeah. This is like a perfect candidate for Afuera development. Afuera product management. So, how I modeled this system. I took a board. I took a physical board, like an actual whiteboard. But you can take any type of board that you have. You can take a GitHub board. You can take a zero board. If you're a psycho. But, yeah. You can take whatever you want. And I started adding features on one side. I started with a simple column, right? I started with a simple column and I added all the features that this app would be great if it had. These features. I want a fully-blown text editor in there. I want to be able to export PNZ files. I want to be able to preview those chart diagrams before I generate them, before I export them. I want to be able to validate how the diagram is correct. I want to be able to have some sort of management, like some sort of organizational management. Like folders or at least a grid view. I want to be able to search through diagrams using their titles or even using their content. Because sometimes I remember what I put in the diagram and I don't remember how I called the diagram. I want it to be an interface that's as straightforward as possible. But I still want it to be pretty. I still want it to be not like an engineer built this, but there was some sort of creative mind involved in this project. And I put all the features in this column, this board. And it's called features. And I put another column on the side that says, it's called pipeline. And what I mean by pipeline is, what are the features that are 100% useful in the pipeline, like in the very basic pipeline that the user is going to use in order to take value from the app. So if I were to download this app right now and I wanted to do the simplest thing that this app promises, like create a diagram, what would I do? What would the features that I put in that board, what would those features be? So I craft another column and I call this pipeline. And I go through all the features that I had placed there and I see create a new diagram. Okay, that's useful. I need to be able to create a new diagram. Code editor, fully-blown code editor. Is it required? No. So no, I'm going to do like a simple text area. And just for alert, I end up doing a full code editor, but just because it was like a one-second site. And it was showing way better in the app. But like the MVP, like the MVP of the MVP was actually just like a text area. No, I'm not going to do a code editor. Save functionality. Do I want the user to be able to save that? Yes. So save functionality. Do I want the user to be able to export like a PNZ? Yes. I want this because I want to share it to social media. And that's like the whole concept. So save is a pipeline feature. And I go through all the features list and have like 30, like post-it notes on the features that are really nice. Not even extravagant features, right? They're basic features. Well, not basic, like they're not baser, but they're basic. So I go through all of them and I say, okay, this one goes in, this one goes out, this one goes in. And every time I was taking one out, I was saying FWARE. And I had the word FWARE in my mind all the time. So it was called pipeline. It was a pipeline there. And I think that Lei believes that the government will be most useful to the people if it's not intervening. If it has like a very simple pipeline that will provide the very basic things that the government needs to provide to the users of society, the users of the government and not do anything else, not be too bloated. And that was the concept of FWARE. So I get back to the pipeline and I start with 30 tickets, if you remember, on the features column. And I end up with seven tickets on the pipeline. So out of the 30 features that I had in mind that are kind of basic, I was saying, having the basic pipeline of the user in mind on the pipeline column helped me speed up development time by a lot. I was able to write 90% of the app. I was able to create a diagram, write all the code necessary, write all the UI components necessary to write a diagram and export an actual mermaid chart from the app on my phone in probably five hours. And you have to take into account that I've never written a mobile app before. So if I was an experienced developer doing that, if I've written countless mobile apps before, that time might be two hours, one hour. And those five hours also include dealing with a build system for Android and iOS. So for a guy that has all these figured out, it might be even like a 30-minute thing. So build something that a user wants, and that user is me. And I could live with the app that I built with just seven features, without seven tickets. I could really live. And it wouldn't be the best experience out there, but since there's no other experience out there, I could really live with that. And even if there were countless apps that were doing that out there, I would have crafted a pipeline so streamlined and it would just do that one thing very good that would still be useful to me, even if it didn't have 100 extra features that would make my life easier. So I ended up building the MVP with just these seven tickets that were in the pipeline. It was usable, as I said. And it's now running in my phone. That MVP is running as TestFlight in my phone. I will be adding more features in that app before releasing it, because I have the time, because it's a hobby project, because I'm not expecting to make money out of it. But not because I was disappointed by the pipeline. You know, the pipeline works. The pipeline method, the appware method works. So now I'm pretty much ready to start deploying that method of developing light products into other software as well. The key, there are some key concepts here that one needs to take into account to be able to use the pipeline method or the appware method. So one is have a board. You don't need a board. You need, like, notes on your phone so that you can write all the features that you think are useful for a product. Before you go there, though, you need to have... If you're not, like, the user of your app, which is really bad, so don't do it. But let's say that you're not, like, the user of your app. You're not going to be using the private banking app that you're writing or whatever. I really want you to be the user of your app so that you can craft better pipelines or workflows. You may call them workflows. I call them pipelines because I like the word. So in order to craft, like, a pipeline, you need to understand why the user is downloading this app or why the user is using this product. What does he want to achieve? And this works especially good for productivity products. It works even for dating products. Like, if you're building a dating app, it works for pretty much all apps except, like, social media apps, which is a different category that I'll touch on the end of this article. You can still use the Afuera method there, but it's going to be a little bit different. So when you understand the pipeline that your user is in dire need of in order to use that app... So let's see how this will work. Let's say you want to build an app or a product that will allow people to exchange money, right? So you envision the product and you say, okay, I have a user who has, like, a bank account. He has a crypto wallet. He has a Revolut subscription. Like, he has some cash in Revolut. He has some cash in PayPal. So I need to build a pipeline for that. And that pipeline is going to be, hey, the user has all these inputs, like all these cash stashes. So he wants to be able to go into the app, select the cash stash, enter the amount, enter one of his contacts or a string. It can be, like, a unique address that's very specific to your own app. Or it can be, like, a contact from his phone. He presses send. He gets, immediately, he gets, like, a success or a failure message. Hey, this went through. Now, if the transaction fails down the line, there's, like, a loop that's going back and says, hey, that transaction failed. It's a notification. That loop is initiated with a notification. Say, hey, this transaction failed. You might want to do it again. And the money goes to the account. So this is like we're building, like, a universal money transfer app. It takes the balances from all the other accounts. It prompts the user to select the stash of cash, select the amount that you want to send, select the recipient, and then to send the money. So it's basically three steps. Select the cash. Select the stash. Select the amount. Select the recipient. Hit send. So four steps. So these steps, these four steps now can be modeled into tickets and can be modeled into features that need to be done so that you can give, like, your user what he needs and start crafting the user experience. So you take the pipeline. You put it on a chart, like a mermaid chart, you know. You put it on a piece of paper. You put it on the board. And on this pipeline or on this description of what the user needs to do, you go back to the board where you have your features. And if the features that you added before are already in there, nice. You just take the ticket and put it on that specific part of the description of that pipeline that you designed. And you say, hey, this is a mandatory feature to be able to complete this pipeline. If not, if there's, like, a feature that needs to be done but was not in the original features board, then you craft it up and you put it there. And in this way, you model the entire user pipeline, like, the entire user experience pipeline with tickets that are actionable and you can work. And you can start writing code or you can start designing or whatever. Now, you build, like, your MVP. So, the requirements here were have a very clear understanding of your user path, of the user pipeline, what the user actually needs to be able to do in your app, why he downloads this app. Next, create the board, add the features, and improve on these features. And you take all these features and put them in the pipeline column or the FOR column. And you start building. Now, as you go along, you will have tickets spawning out of these tickets, mostly as bags or additional features that need to be built in order to support these features. So, you do the same process again. You go through the loop of creating a new feature board for a specific feature. And you go through the resolution pipeline of the specific bag or why this bag is important to be resolved or why this feature needs to be added to support another feature. And you do the feature, Afuera feature, Afuera. And those are kept in the Afuera board, which is kind of oxymoron, right? Afuera means get out, but those are actually the ones that are going to be get in. I may need to invent something better for that. I'm going to be the ones that are really useful. And you're going to start saving up development time and execution time and eventually maintenance time. Like, when you go back to your app, you have not a hundred things to maintain. You have three. And this is how you can do, like, Afuera development on all of your products. Now, for a very small subset of apps, like apps that are social media, for example, or apps that the main thing the user wants from is content, like video content or text content. Or you might even go even further and say from text content he wants, like, conflict. Or from video content he wants, like, fashion or he wants port or he wants, like, war. You see, you craft a pipeline not through actions that the user has to take in order to achieve a certain goal. But you start taking notes of the steps that this user has to go through in order to be in a state where this content will start being fed. Like, if you're building, like, a new Twitter, that new Twitter is all about building apps, right? You want to model the app in a way and you want to create the user pipeline in a way where you kind of steer the user to train the app. Like, train the new Twitter algorithm, like, the product Twitter algorithm to basically teach the application, teach the product to show your user all the content that's hidden in this app. That's really gonna interest your user and he's gonna be kept hooked in into your product. So you build that pipeline that way. And really, as an epilogue, as a conclusion, the idea of software development, I'm not sure if it's something new. I certainly believe that it's not something new. Maybe the phrase is new, maybe the term I coined is new, but I believe doing the bare minimum for your MVP is an idea that has been going on for ages. And it's an idea that's been taught in startup accelerators and funds and major engineering companies, major tech companies, whatever. But all of these, like, I've never been a product manager, I've never been an explicitly product manager or product owner. So, being a founder, I had to somehow come up with my own framework of executing fast and doing Blitzquake development, which we're gonna talk about in another post. But I came up with this software method and it works really well for me. And I hope it works well for you, too. But the concept is nothing new. It's basically doing the bare minimum. It's basically being lazy. And accepting that laziness is not bad, but it's a feature. Accepting that taking as few steps as possible to achieve something is a feature. And accepting the fact that most of the times users want to be able to achieve a goal and don't really care about all the extra bells and whistles that you want to build to make their life easier. Because they have a life outside of a wrap. They have things they want to do outside of a wrap, hopefully. So, taking them over and over, flowing them with all the bells and whistles that are supposed to make their life easier or they're supposed to integrate with a thousand other apps or do a thousand other things, might actually be a deterrent for your users sticking to your product. And it also helps all parts of an engineering project work more efficiently. It helps UI designers. They have fewer UI components inside. It helps product managers. They have fewer product features to manage. It helps people who operate the app. It helps people who sale the app to basically get their sales agenda really nailed down to the brass tacks and just focus on that and execute on that vision. And it allows you to have a vision as well. It allows you to say, hey, I'm doing this and I'm doing really good and I want to help this and that and that. And then you can go and add things as users request them if you think that they are useful. But you can do it in a way that you don't end up developing stuff and don't really want to. So, this is it. This is half-hour development. I hope it's useful to you. I hope it's definitely been useful to me and it allowed me to do more products more quickly. Stay safe.
