---
title: Illusions of venture capital in startup dynamics
date: 2024-01-12
description: Don't raise if you're not serving customers
tags:
  - startups
  - capitalism
  - venture capital
---

I recently attended a meeting, a common occurrence these days as I spend much of my time in front of a camera, either listening to or conversing with people. I am assisting a friend in launching her first venture. To be precise, I wouldn't categorize it as a startup. Were I to complete a questionnaire, it would most likely be classified as an online business rather than a startup. In any case, during this meeting, we engaged with a competitor who is attempting to implement the same idea, likely based on very similar principles. A significant topic of discussion was venture capital. In the dynamic and often unpredictable realm of internet-based financing, the decision to pursue venture capital is laden with complexity, marked by potential unseen consequences and frequently misinterpreted motives.

I am what venture capitalists would likely label as a technical founder. While I don't regard myself as an exceptional web engineer, I possess a solid understanding of designing and operating fairly complex software applications. My co-founder excels in marketing, and I have observed her effectively nurturing active communities and substantial followerships across various social media platforms. This expertise is invaluable; some might argue it's even more crucial than having a product. Products can fail in the absence of effective distribution, whereas distribution might initially succeed even without a solid product. However, such cases often eventually get exposed as fraudulent schemes.

In contrast, our competitor, a solo founder, finds herself in a distinct predicament. Her venture lacks technical expertise. Her involvement in an accelerator program signals her urgent pursuit of venture capital. This pursuit is not aimed at expanding her network or acquiring knowledge but stems from the necessity to assemble a team and execute her plan.

The allure of venture capital is strong. But, it comes with its own set of limitations. The pursuit of it can precipitously divert founders from their quintessential mission: the provision of consummate service to customers and the profound comprehension of their requisites. Additionally, the endeavor to secure financial backing is not only chronologically protracted but also often culminates in a state of profound disenchantment. It's a process that can be both psychologically and strategically debilitating. This dichotomy between the exigencies of capital acquisition and the foundational ethos of customer-centric business is a paradigmatic challenge.

Our approach for building the company strays away from venture capital. It's a prudent approach and it ensures our retention of authoritative control. We are able to enable the prioritization of building a better customer experience, transcending the often myopic focus on expeditious scaling and the maximization of profits. While swift financial returns are sexy and can often lead to extreme liquidity events for the founders and the investors, these black swans are extremely spare and reserved for a specific set of tech startups. My belief that we are not building a startup, at least, during this phase, but we are building an audience through a product, requires a commitment to sustainable, value-driven business development.

Even in scenarios where entrepreneurs triumph in amassing substantial venture capital, such financial influx not only decelerates the process but also brings a plethora of intricacies. Post-acquisition of these funds, founders frequently encounter the exigency of capital administration, a task predominantly manifested in the realm of recruitmen or service expenses. Managing newfound resources can inadvertently lead to a deviation from the foundational objective of product development, thereby engendering a potential misalignment of priorities. This phenomenon underscores the paradoxical nature of venture capital: while ostensibly a catalyst for growth, it can, in reality, impose significant operational and strategic burdens, detracting from the focus on innovation and market responsiveness.

In the vis-à-vis analysis to our competition, our self-reliant modus operandi confers upon us, potentially, a substantial strategic advantage. While they grapple with the complexities inherent in the assembly of a technical team, our focus remains undiluted. We are owning our product and the augmentation of our distribution network. Autonomy and self-sufficiency in the nascent phases of a business's lifecycle is crucial. Such independence is instrumental in fostering an environment conducive to innovation and agile response to market dynamics, thereby usually establishing a robust foundation for sustainable growth and competitive superiority.

The recontextualization of the role of capital is important. Monetary assets are not the zenith of entrepreneurial achievement, but rather as a facilitative instrument geared towards the enhancement of customer experience. Harmonizing commercial endeavors with the true barometer of business success; the attainment of customer satisfaction.

The deliberation over whether to pursue venture capital must be calibrated against the characteristics of the startup and its particular phase of evolution. Startups poised to effectuate global transformation or those adept at negotiating advantageous terms may indeed find venture capital to be beneficial. However, for the majority, particularly within the sphere of online enterprises, a strategy that emphasizes customer-centric growth and employs existing financial resources as a means to augment the customer experience is a more judicious and enduring approach. This perspective advocates for a prudent alignment of financial strategies with the overarching objective of customer value creation, ensuring that business decisions are not solely driven by capital acquisition but are intrinsically linked to the long-term satisfaction and loyalty of the customer base.
